Budgeting is a very simple idea that you’ve probably already heard of.  It’s literally just thinking about how you’re going to allot the money you have so that you can accomplish everything with it that you want to. Usually when you think of budgeting it’s as ‘oh I’ll spend money here, spend money there, etc’ but it’s not just about spending. Saving and investing can be allocated on your budget too.


budget categories: essentials, security, goals, lifestyle, discretionary


All monthly budgets start with your disposable income — we can define this as the amount of  money you take home from your paycheck after taxes and other deductions. The Essential Budget Categories that most people give themselves are
1. Housing (25-35 percent)
The amount you pay to have a roof over your head constitutes a housing cost. This includes everything from rent or mortgage payments to property taxes, HOA dues, and home maintenance costs like if you have to update your peeling paint or pay for a lead checkup. For most budgeters, this category is by far the biggest. 
2. Transportation (10-15 percent)
Regardless of your location or lifestyle, everyone needs to get from point A to point B. Typically, this budget category includes car payments, registration and DMV fees, gas, maintenance, parking, tolls, ridesharing costs, and public transit. 
3. Food (10-15 percent)
It’s obviously crucial to account for food expenses. Many budgeters include grocery shopping (either at a store like safeway or trader joes, or a farmer’s market) and dining out in this category (e.g., restaurant meals, work lunches, food delivery, etc.). That’s whether you’re really making your own meals, or even just buying like microwave dinners.
However, if you want really fine dining, where all the food’s like $15, you might want to put your non-grocery food expenses, like gourmet foods, into one of the non-essential categories. Please remember, like I hope you all know this, since I didn’t realize this for a while, but $15 is genuinely a lot to spend on one item, at least if you’re not going to a 7 michelin starred restaurant. For normal food, that’s a lot, and you definitely shouldn’t expect yourself to get that everyday because you won’t be able to afford it and you honeslty don’t really need it? Some of those places are priced way more than they’re worth, and it might be actually better going to a cheaper restaurant or, best, cooking at home. It’s fine to want to go to those kind of places, but they’ll be in your nonessential category, not the essential food category.
The basic idea behind your budget categories, instead of just listing like tomatoes or not listing at all, is to itemize each one. This way you can see where your expenses lie in terms of your needs versus your wants. This is my grocery money, this is my fancy restaurant money. Keep this in mind with every category.
4. Utilities (5-10 percent)
Water, electricity, and HVAC (heating, ventilation, and a/c) are vital to practically every well-functioning household. Your utilities category should cover all the expenses that keep these services up and running. Everyone’s expenses are going to be a little different based on where they live — a household in Virginia Beach (avg $184) won’t have the same heating bill as a home in the Bay Area (avg. $283). (i think those are monthly prices?) that’s not a judgement on the places, but that’s how it’s running right now, so based on where you live this category will be alotted differently.
Utilities generally include your gas, electricity, water, and sewage bills. Households can also factor in their “connectivity” expenses, which are pretty important to a lot of people, like your cell phone bill, cable or streaming services, and internet expenses. 
5. Insurance (10-25 percent)
The insurance budget category depends very much on your own, individual preferences. 
Many budgeters will categorize insurance with what exactly they’re insuring. Health insurance, for example, would fall under “Healthcare.” The insurance on your vehicle would fall under “Transportation,” and both are totally valid — do whatever helps you feel most organized. 
Other budgeters include insurance separately as one of their basic budget categories. In that case, it should include every single insurance payment, which should include:
health insurance (only what’s not deducted pre-tax by your employer, and also what you get from your job will probably be different for diff ppl)
homeowner’s or renter’s insurance
home warranties or protection plans (explain warranty rq)
auto insurance
life insurance
disability insurance, if you have a disability
There’s a lot of nuances with insurance. 
6. Medical & Healthcare (5-10 percent)
“health is wealth”. Maintaining both your health and overall well-being are essential, so it’s critical to include enough in your budget to cover these costs. Plan for routine medical care, like yearly physicals, dental appointments, and mental health care, and you might need specific different doctors (like for me, i go to an allergist, and an asthma doctor, and an orthodontist and a dermatologist and an audiologist, and i went to a sleep doctor for a while) and if you’re in a stable place financially it’s important to keep money for emergency medical expenses you might not anticipate. Depending on your own life, your own condition, it’s gonna differ a lot.
The medical and healthcare budget category includes anything you might spend on healthcare, such as, which you might realize:
out-of-pocket (meaning not covered by insurance from your job or what you pay for) costs for primary care, which could include an additional prcedure like a surgery or braces or smth
specialty care (dermatologists, psychologists, PT, etc.)
dental care
the eye doctor
urgent care
prescriptions (glasses and pills and ointments)
supplements and vitamins (not dictated by your doctor, but what you feel you need, or they suggested it)
medical devices and supplies
If you decide to split up your insurance into each separate home budget category, remember to include your health insurance premiums here, too.
7. Saving, Investing, & Debt Payments (5-20 percent)
This often-overlooked (or dare we say, underfunded?) home budget category is actually really important. Saving money may not have an immediate impact on your life day-to-day, but it can position you toward positive financial health down the road. Usually, when you don’t have that money, you’ll be spending most of it on rent and utilities, which are immediately needed, but it’s crucial not to overlook this one either because it’ll make sure you have more money in the future and you’re more cushioned against emergency expenses.
While we always want to hope for the best, life can sometimes be unexpected. Without an emergency fund, you might not be in a great spot if you get blindsided by a sudden medical expense, car accident, or job loss. So this emergency fund is probably pretty useful.
At a bare minimum, every household should have an emergency fund earmarked for unexpected expenses, as well as a retirement account such as a 401(k) or IRA, separate from each other. This budget category can also be used to pay down any high-interest debt you’re carrying, such as credit card bills, personal loans, or student loans, and if you have that debt you def def want to have this category taken care of on your budget.
You can start small, if you don’t have too much money, but in the future expect to be putting more into this category. And you should have at least smth here.
Once you’ve budgeted for your family’s essential needs (housing, transport, food, utilities, healthcare, insurance, and savings/nvestment/debt), the money you have left for non-essentials is called your discretionary income. Discretionary income is what you’ll use, at your own discretion, for things like personal expenses, recreation, and gifts. 
Non-essential expenses tend to vary from month to month, depending on your spending habits. They’re also the easiest expenses to cut back on for a little bit, especially if you want to pay down debt or build your savings more quickly. 
8. Personal Spending (5-10 percent)
This category is a catch-all for anything that could be considered a personal care or “lifestyle” expense. Personal spending includes things like: 
gym memberships 
clothes and shoes (aside from the basic necessity of them. Like we talked about yesterday, clothes you need vs clothes you want)
home decor and furnishings
gifts
Because some personal care products are essential, such as soap and laundry detergent, you could include those in your food budget category or smth there.
9. Recreation & Entertainment (5-10 percent)
It’s extremely important to have fun — I’d never say not to! Your recreation and entertainment category is how much you’ll spend for your free time, and it’s best to be mindful and moderate in this particular category.
For most of us, carving out time for fun is essential to maintaining a healthy work-life balance. Or, school-life balance! This budget category can include things like:
concert tickets
sports games
family activities & vacations
streaming services and other subscriptions (e.g., Hulu and Netflix)
restaurants (if you didn’t include this under “Food”)
video games
hobbies
In other words, this home budget category includes all your fun stuff. Enjoy it however you want to!
But also remember that this category really doesn’t need a bunch of money--- there’s a lot of ways to have fun without money, and we shouldn’t tie our free time to money because that’s pretty unhealthy. You can have fun with or without money--- it’;s just about what you make of what you have, so don’t worry about not spending as much money in this category. It diesnt mean you have to be all sad and bored all the time.
And when you do spend here, spend on more long lasting things, like card or board games which you can play repeatedly but only pay for once, or sports equipment (if sports are something you only do as a hobby. If you do sports with a league or something, that’s going to become more important to buy, but you still have to figure out how important it is to get the newest or whatever). Another thing could be, like I said, concert tickets, or sports games, or vacations, which you can save up to and treat yourself with every once in a while, since it’s more expensive. You’re not going to go for a concert every month, for example, and probably not every year either. Or if you want to go to concerts more often, you could look for local and cheaper artists to support.
Budgeting isn’t about depriving yourself of fun so you can hoard your money, it’s about making sure that you have enough money to do everything you need AND several things you want.
The final category on your budget isn’t really anything specific:
10. Miscellaneous (5-10 percent)
This category is reserved for anything that isn’t already covered in your basic budget categories. It can also be used as an “overflow” category when you need a little extra somewhere else.
For example, if you have a big family, you probably have substantial amounts that you spend on clothes and haircuts for your kids. (remember, not all this stuff applies right now!) If you’ve maxed out your “Personal Monthly Expenses” category, you could account for those items under Miscellaneous. 
Or if  you finish college and then go back for a new degree or something, it could be another situation where you could categorize expenses like your tuition and textbooks under Miscellaneous.
Let’s note: The idea of essentials and nonessentials is the same as needs and wants—- needs have to be covered, wants can be covered once needs are. Budgeting will help you spend on bigger and more important purchases in the future, instead of just whatever small ones right now. It can also help you save and invest, which means you’ll be growing your money for years to come. It also means you have more money to give, to charity or other cool organizations or to help people in your life who might not have money.
Aside from what we’ve outlined already, this is a quick budgeting guideline for you: Budgeting 50-30-20 rule (50% of this on essentials (or needs), 30% on non-essentials (or wants), and 20% on savings and paying off debt.) this is a really good rule and should be used as your baseline for budgeting once you have essentials to spend on. Another way is what was outlined already, which adds up to around 75% essentials, 15-20% savings, and 5-10% nonessentials, and might be what you need to do when you first start getting an income, before you have enough stability and freedom to actually apply the 50-30-20 rule. And you should always calculate your budget with only your disposable, post-tax income.


   * Exploring the benefits of budgeting, such as tracking expenses and saving money
* Identifying sources of income and differentiating between fixed and variable expenses
* Learning how to track and categorize expenses
* Discussing strategies for budgeting success, including setting realistic goals and priorities
* Exploring techniques to control spending and avoid impulse purchases
* Introduction to budget adjustments and managing unexpected expenses
   * Understanding the role of budgeting in achieving financial goals
   * Exploring strategies for saving and investing within a budget
   * Discussing the importance of reviewing and adjusting budgets regularly


debt is when you owe something to someone, and here it means that you need to pay off a loan to a bank or the government. Student loans are a big one in this country, you might have seen things in the news about them especially in the past year. Think of if you borrowed something from your friend--- you’re going to need to either give it back (if it’s a book, or shirt) or give them something that’ll be equally useful. That’s like debt, when you still owe them something. 
Savings is money that you keep in a separate account so that after you put a little bit in for a lot of time, there’ll be a lot of money in there which you can use for a big purchase or something. esp. if you keep it in a bank, there’ll be compound interest, so you can get more. Savings can also just be like if you had a piggy bank when you were younger, and you put money in it to save up for a new toy.
